Unit - 2 Consensus Algorithms Dr. Sushil Kumar Singh Associate Professor, Computer Engineering Department Office Location: MA252 01CE0720 Blockchain Technology Topics (Unit - 2) Consensus Algorithms : Basic of Consensus A lgorithms Requirements for the Consensus P rotocol for Permission L ess E nvironment Types of Consensus Algorithm PoW - Proof of Work PoS - Proof of Stake DPoS - Delegated Proof of Stake PoA - Proof of Authority/ Identity PoET - Proof of Elapsed Time BFT - Byzentine Fault Tolerance PoAh - Proof of Authentication https:// www.algoworks.com /blog/blockchain - in - gaming/ Basics of Cryptographic Primitives for Blockchain Development https:// www.algoworks.com /blog/blockchain - in - gaming/ Basic cryptographic primitives include hash primitives , digital signatures , and encryption primitives incorporated in Blockchain . H ash primitives such as SHA - 256 , SHA - 512 , and Ethash . Digital signatures, such as the Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm (ECDSA) are the current signature scheme in Bitcoin . Schnorr Signatures and BLS Signatures rectify issues faced by ECDSA . All the algorithms work on symmetric and asymmetric key encryption . Basics of Cryptographic Primitives for Blockchain Development Digital Signature DS Verification Algorithm M Pr Key S DS Generation Algorithm Valid or Not Pub Key M S + S.K. Singh Manish A digital signature is a mathematical technique used to validate the authenticity and integrity of a digital document . It is intended to solve the problems of tampering and impersonation in digital communications . It provides evidence of the origin, identity, and status of electronic documents, transactions, and digital messages . Message Digest Message Authentication is a mechanism for verifying and validating a message's integrity using the cryptographic hash function, often termed Message Authentication Code (MAC) . Message authentication helps ensure the sender's data integrity, a crucial responsibility for both the sender and the receiver . The message is considered as an input that will be passed through the hash function , i . e . , the message digest function , to get the desired output as a message digest . Multiple message digest algorithms exist, such as MD, MD 2 , MD 3 , MD 4 , and MD 5 . The latest and most popular algorithms are MD 5 and MD 6 . Ron Rivest developed the MD 5 algorithm . It is a cryptographic hash function used as a file encryption function and produces message digests of 128 bits . RIPEMD (RACE Integrity Primitives Evaluation Message Digest) RACE Integrity Primitives Evaluation Message Digest can be abbreviated as RIPEMD . It contains a group of hash functions, such as RIPEMD - 128 , RIPEMD - 160 , RIPEMD - 256 , and RIPEMD - 320 . The version of RIPEMD of 128 bits does not guarantee to preservation of the integrity of the message to that extent . RIPEMD with 160 bits provides the network with higher security . The release of RIPEMD with extended versions of 256 bits and 320 bits provides the same security level as the previous version . It can be implemented considering the block associated with the RIPEMD - 160 hash algorithm . The integrity of the message can be preserved by splitting it into blocks of 512 bits and utilizing the compression function . After that, it can go through two rounds of the considered block (sub - block) using different values of constant k associated with the block . Ethhash Nowadays, industries utilize Ethereum blockchain - based platforms to deploy their applications with security and privacy . Ethash can be defined as an algorithm t hat performs mining on Ethereum based on the Proof - of - Work algorithm . SCrypt SCrypt is also a PoW mining algorithm , first released with Tenebrix in 2011 . After that, many researchers have utilized it to deploy different blockchain - based projects . SCrypt is proposed to enhance the security maintained in the SHA - 256 algorithm . Its efficiency in securing passwords with a security key retrieved from the master password is a significant deterrent against brute force attacks, instilling confidence in its protective capabilities . Now, when we pass an input message through the SCrypt algorithm to generate the hash value , it produces some noise, distracting malicious attackers from securing the message's content . We can say that the SCrypt mining algorithm protects the data from malicious activity due to its features . Authentication The digital signature provides authentication by using asymmetric key cryptography . Integrity The integrity of the data is essential . The data can be altered or breached during transmission . Thus, a mechanism to ensure the integrity of the data is required . The digital signature provides a widely used mechanism for ensuring the integrity of the received data . Non - repudiation Non - repudiation is a property or security measure that a digital signature provides . The sender cannot deny sending a message that he sent . If the sender has sent some message to the receiver and after some time the sender refuses to admit that he has sent that particular message , if the digital signature was applied in this situation, then the sender could not deny that they have not sent that specific message . From the concept of the digital signature, we know that if the sender sends a message by encrypting the message with its private key, then that encrypted message can be decrypted only by its public key . A similar mechanism is also applied here . If the senders public key can successfully decrypt the message, it is evident that the message has been encrypted using the senders private key, which the sender itself can only possess . So, no other entity could send this encrypted message that the senders public key can successfully decrypt . This way, the sender cannot deny sending the message . Algorithms for Digital Signature ECDSA (Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm) The Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm (ECDSA) is the current signature scheme in Bitcoin . It is based on elliptic curve cryptography (ECC) . ECDSA depends on elliptic curves over finite fields . It also depends on the difficulty of the elliptic curve discrete logarithm problem (ECDLP) rather than prime factoring difficulty . RSA (Rivest, Shamir, Adleman) Algorithm . ElGamal Encryption System Algorithm . DSA (Digital Signature Algorithm) . ECDSA (Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm) . ECDSA (Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm) ECDSA (Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm) Schnorr Signatures Algorithm Bitcoin has always used ECDSA, but it lacks to compress and verify signatures together efficiently . Hence, there is an inclination to change to a new strategy that enhances Bitcoins scalability, privacy, storage, and security . Schnorr signatures have the following characteristics that enable it to be better than ECDSA . Using the same key and message , a third party cannot modify a valid signature to construct another valid one . It increases privacy as the list and number of participants are hidden by public - key aggregation into a single and valid signature . Schnorr Digital Signature Scheme employs elliptic curve cryptography like ECDCA . Schnorr Signatures Algorithm Ring Signatures (Group Signature) Ring Signature was developed in 2001 by Rivest, Adi Shamir, and Yael Taumanby . These digital signatures authorize multiple group members to sign the message securely and anonymously . Only the original signer will know which group member actually signed the message . Ring Signatures Ring Signatures Consensus and Distributed Consensus Consensus means achieving a decision state with which all ne
